[jaxpr consts] Add an internal implementation note (#30534)
jax-ml/jax: docs/internals/constants.md

(constants-note)=

# Handling of closed-over constants

"Closed-over constants" are non-scalar arrays that are encountered during JAX tracing
of a function and do not have dependencies on any of the function's arguments.
JAX operations such as `jax.numpy` and `lax` are staged out and do not create
closed-over constants.
In the following example, the arrays
`a_jax_array` and `np.full` are closed-over constants, but `jnp.full`
is not. We refer below to closed-over constants simply as constants.

```python

> from jax import numpy as jnp

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
import numpy as np
from jax import jit
from jax import numpy as jnp
```

which would make the code runnable if copy-pasted

since `jax` and `np` are used later in the example:

```
@jit
 def f(x):
   return x + a_jax_array + np.full((16,), 42.) + jnp.full((16,), 142.)
```

a_jax_array = jnp.ones((16,), dtype=np.float32)

@jit
def f(x):
  return x + a_jax_array + np.full((16,), 42.) + jnp.full((16,), 142.)
```

We describe below the **future** internal implementation details for
constants. As of July 2025, this is not yet the default implementation;
it is enabled by the environment variable `JAX_USE_SIMPLIFIED_JAXPR_CONSTANTS=True`.
See further [below](#previous-implementation) for the details of the previous
implementation, including its drawbacks.

When JAX tracing encounters a constant that is either an argument of a JAX primitive
or a function return, it is represented as a `core.Literal`, and is embedded

> in the `Jaxor` along with the primitive that use them.

Reviewer: `Jaxpr` ?

> in the `Jaxor` along with the primitive that use them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the `Jaxpr` along with the primitives that use them.
```

also "primitives" (plural)

  when we export because the export serialization does not currently support
  serialization of arrays.
  We use the `mlir.LoweringParameters.hoist_constants_as_args` parameter
  to control this.

One additional complication is that some of the internal lowering functions
need to take the argument avals and sometimes also the shardings and
layouts for the arguments. Furthermore, the avals, shardings, and layout for
all arguments, including the const args,
are used also after lowering also. Therefore, it is convenient
to compute these fairly high in the call stack, e.g., in
`pxla.lower_sharding_computations`, and pass them down.

For example, the functions `mlir.lower_jaxpr_to_module`,
`pjit._pjit_cached_lower_jaxpr_to_fun`, and, `mlir.lower_jaxpr_to_fun`
take `in_avals`, `in_shardings`, and `in_layouts` that
that include both the avals for const_args and for the regular args
(the ones corresponding to the `Jaxpr.invars`).
They also take a `num_const_args` argument.

The result of lowering, e.g., `pxla.MeshComputaton`,
stores both a HLO module and a list
of `const_args`. When we execute the result of the compilation
we pass the `const_args` ahead of the actual arguments.

> We include the `const_args` in the `pxla.MeshExecutableFastpathData`

Reviewer 2: This is not true yet right?

Author: You are right. I have removed this part, and will write it when I make some more changes to the execution path.
